Network Devices: Computer networks can also include multiple devices/mediums which help in the communication between two different devices; these are known as Network devices and include things such as NIC, modem, hub, switches, routers, and bridges. 
NIC: Stands for Network Interface Card. This is also known as network adapter card, Ethernet Card and LAN card.
Modem: It is a device that enables a computer to send or receive data over telephone or cable lines that combination of two devices modulator and demodulator.
Repeater: It is signal regenerate device that is used in between 2 network devices in same network. It operates at the physical layer.
Hub: it is centralized device that connects multiple devices in a single LAN network
Switch: It is network device that connects other devices to Ethernet networks through twisted pair cables. That uses packet switching technique to receive, store and forward data packets on the network. It maintains a list of network addresses of all the devices connected to it.
Bridge: Bridge is used to divide a large network into smaller segments,
Breaking a large network into smaller segments,	
Connecting different media types. Such as connects UTP with the fiber optic, 
Connecting different network architectures. Such as connects Ethernet with the Token ring.
Router: it is a device like a switch that routes data packets based on their IP addresses. Router is mainly a Network Layer device and connect LANs and WANs together.
A router reads its routing table to decide the best available route the packet can take to reach its destination quickly and accurately.
Brouter: bridging router is a device which combines features of both bridge and router. It can work either at data link layer or at network layer.
Gateways: it is a network device used to connect two or more networks having different protocols.

OSI model (Open Systems Interconnection): It is developed by International Organization for Standardization or ISO, the Open Systems Interconnection model or OSI model is a critical building block in networking. 
Information technology (IT) networking professionals use OSI model to understand the concept, how data is sent or received over a network.
There are 7 layers in the OSI Model and each layer has its specific role in handling data. All the layers are mentioned below
7. Application Layer: The application Layer is the topmost layer of the OSI Model, where the user interacts with the system using an application.
6. Presentation Layer: The presentation Layer has the work of encrypting and decryption data, and converting it to such form that can be accessed by Application Layer.
5. Session Layer: The Session Layer works in the establishment, termination, and management sessions.
4. Transport Layer: The transport layer is responsible for message delivery across the points covered in the path to the destination.
3. Network Layer: The Network Layer is responsible for data transmission from one host to another located in multiple networks.
2. Data Link Layer: DLL works for the node-to-node delivery of the message.
1. Physical Layer: Physical layer is the lowest layer in the OSI Model. This layer works on establishing actual physical connections among devices.

Layers	Working	Protocol Data Unit	Protocols
1 – Physical Layer	Establishing Physical Connections between Devices.	Bits	USB, SONET/SDH
2 –Data Link Layer	Node to Node Delivery of Message.	Frames	Ethernet, PPP

3 – Network Layer	Transmission of data from one host to another, located in different networks.	Packets	IP, ICMP, IGMP, OSPF
4–Transport Layer	Take Service from Network Layer and provide it to the Application Layer.	Segments (TCP), Datagrams (UDP)	TCP, UDP, SCTP
5 – Session Layer	Establishes Connection, Maintenance, Ensures Authentication and Ensures security.	Data	NetBIOS, RPC, PPTP
6–Presentation Layer	Data from the application layer is extracted and manipulated in the required format for transmission.	Data	TLS/SSL, MIME, JPEG, PNG, ASCII
7– Application Layer	Helps in identifying the client and synchronizing communication.	Data	FTP, SMTP, DNS, DHCP

Q:2. What are common protocols and their associated ports in DevOps?
Ans. Protocol is a set of rules and standards that manage how data is transmitted over a network. Like. tcp/ip, https and ftp.
1.	SSH (Secure Shell) Port 22: SSH is used for secure remote access to the server. It is required to manage servers, deploy code, and perform various administrative tasks.
2.	HTTP (Port 80): HTTP is the primary protocol used to transfer data over the Web. Port 80 is the default port for HTTP traffic.
3.	HTTPS (Port 443): HTTPS encrypts HTTP traffic for secure communications over the Internet. Port 443 is the default port for HTTPS.
4.	FTP (File Transfer Protocol) Port 21: FTP is used to transfer files between a client and a server over a network. Port 21 is the default port for FTP control.
5.	SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) Port 25: SMTP is used to send email messages between servers. Port 25 is the default port for SMTP.
6.	DNS (Domain Name System) Port 53: DNS is responsible for translating domain names into IP addresses. Port 53 is used for DNS queries.
7.	MySQL (Port 3306): MySQL is a popular relational database management system. Port 3306 is the default port for MySQL connections.

Hands-On with Networking Commands: Practice essential networking commands.
PING stands for Packet InterNet Groper: It's a network utility that sends an echo request message using the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP). It's used to test connectivity and troubleshoot network problems. 
$ ping google.com
Traceroute / tracert (trace packet routes): It is a network diagnostic tool used to track in real-time the pathway taken by a packet on an IP network from source to destination, "Traceroute" is the command used on Linux and macOS systems, while "tracert" is the equivalent command used on Windows systems.
$ traceroute google.com
Netstat (network statistics): it is a networking tool that displays network status and statistics. It can be used for troubleshooting, configuration, and monitoring network connections.
$ netstat -ano | grep ":22"
cURL, which stands for client URL (HTTP requests): It is a command line tool that developers use to transfer data to and from a server.
$ curl https://example.com
Nslookup (DNS lookup): It is a command-line tool that allows users to query a Domain Name System (DNS) server. It's used to find information about domain names, IP addresses, and DNS records. 
$ nslookup google.com
Dig stands for Domain Information Groper: It is a network administration command-line tool for querying the Domain Name System (DNS). it is useful for network troubleshooting.
$ dig google.com
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP): It is a network protocol that translates IP addresses into MAC addresses. This allows devices on a local area network (LAN) to communicate with each other.
$ arp -a 
Tracepath: It is a network diagnostic tool, primarily used in Linux systems, that allows you to trace the route taken by packets from your computer to a specified destination.
$ tracepath www.google.com
Nmap, or Network Mapper: It is a free, open-source tool that scans networks for security vulnerabilities. It's used by security professionals and network administrators.
$ nmap --top-ports 22 google.com
